---
layout: post
title:  "And Just Like That, Box Office Mojo is Back"
date:   2014-10-12
categories: movies, data
---

After a day of mostly confusion, [Box Office Mojo is back
up](http://www.boxofficemojo.com/). It has not, strangely, been updated in a
few days - but the original site is there. (Other strange things - "Last
Updated 12/31/1969," "#1 Movie: ' '", etc.) But even though it's back, the
amount of uproar/confusion (at least within the film reporting community) only
serves to highlight the importance it plays in providing a huge amount of
movie data (financial and otherwise) and how easy it would be for IMDb/Amazon
to pull it away.  
  
But the question is, how do you completely reproduce that level of data? Where
do you get it (in a legitimate way)? The site doesn't actually have all that
much in the way of data - daily box office domestically and internationally
per movie, movie-specific info (runtime, budget, etc.), cast and crew info,
and some level of tagging. It's the depth of the dataset (having daily box
office for a movie) and the breadth of their coverage (effectively all movies
released in the last 15 years) that would be difficult, but not impossible, to
reassemble elsewhere. To be honest, though - as long as there is a legitimate,
trusted, separate source for this data, it's really not that hard to put
together (it's really, in the grand scheme of things, not that much data).  
  
[This conversation](https://twitter.com/keithcalder/status/520669790071820289)
among a few involved in the film industry - bloggers, producers, interested
people - reinforces the idea that an independent source of this data is
crucial. It also raises a few other interesting points - like the idea that
IMDb has focused on unnecessary features rather than better data (or even
better ways to access data). But it's unclear how to create a viable
alternative. In the meantime, we still have Mojo.  
  
(I also missed a serious opportunity yesterday to make
[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gEuw2mgLRuQ) the headline - honestly,
film reporters, you all missed it. Everybody failed.)

