Since July 2002, I've tried to save the ticket from every movie I've seen in a
theater. In the beginning, I was, admittedly, not prescient enough to have
saved every single one, but I did so with pretty reliable consistency in the
last 10 or so years. I've had a lot of ideas about what to do with them -
frame them, put them under a sheet of glass at the bar in my hip new downtown
movie theater/bar/[ultimate hang
zone](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0443409/?ref_=fn_al_tt_4), [throwing them
all in the air while jumping on my
bed](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blank_Check_\(film\)) \- but to start, I did
the boring thing and entered all of them into a spreadsheet.  
  
This was partially for my own - morbid - curiosity. But it's also a dataset
that's easily analyzable, and, more importantly, mine. It's personal, and
hopefully tells a story about who I am. I don't want to divorce this blog -
which could be a potentially boring or impersonal collection of charts,
numbers, and objective analyses - from the reason I started it - I genuinely,
wholeheartedly love movies, and I want to say something about the art form and
the industry that isn't already being said. So in that spirit, I'm going to
spend a few posts analyzing myself and my moviegoing habits - maybe it'll be
indicative of the way the rest of the world goes to the movies, maybe it'll be
an interesting look at my changing tastes and habits, or maybe it'll just
reveal that I've spent something like 3 weeks of my life (that I can account
for) in a dark room, watching movies.  
  
I'm working on visualizations of the data - that again, may or may not be
interesting, but hey! they're interesting to me - but that'll come later.
First, my initial thoughts on my own moviegoing.  

####  First Conclusions

  1. I have 263 movie tickets that I've saved since July 1, 2002. That's 12 years ago. The first movie: _Mr. Deeds_. The last movie: _Under the Skin_. Make of that what you will.
  2. In that time, I've spent at least $2,340 at the theater. There are invariably movies missing from this, so it's likely on the order of $3,000. Mostly my money, I'd hope.
  3. Of the 263 movies, 47.7% were PG-13, 38.9% were R, 8.7% were PG, 2.3% were G, and 2.3% weren't technically rated. 0.38% was an R rated movie I snuck into three days before my 17th birthday ( _Final Destination 3_  \- but I got a ticket for _When a Stranger Calls_. a. What's the statute of limitations on sneaking into R-rated movies? b. Studios, get it together - February doesn't have to be as bad as you make it.)
  4. I saw the most movies - 34 apiece - in both 2007 and 2008. 2013 was the lowest count since 2004, with only 17. 
  5. In July 2008, I went to the movies 7 times - the most in any month - and had arguably the greatest week of all time (GWOAT) when I saw _The Dark Knight, The Dark Knight (IMAX), The Big Lebowski,_ and _Step Brothers_ in a single week. All downhill.
    1. I saw  _The Dark Knight_  5 times in the theater. I've spent $88.82 for the Batman franchise.
  6. I spent, on average, $8.95 per ticket. In later years, I figured out that if you go early, it's cheaper! (Also if you know someone - that means it's $0.00.)
  7. My most popular day and time, by a lot - Friday between 7PM and 8PM. I'm why people don't go to the movies.
  8. Now for the most distressing stuff. Far and away my most frequented theater - [AMC Marple 10](http://www.yelp.com/biz/amc-marple-10-springfield) ("This place suckz!" - Yelp reviewer). 99 movies. Over $700. Greats like _Agent Cody Banks_ and _[Be Cool](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0377471/)_.
  9. It's hard to single out the best or worst movie of all of these. And yet, it's easy to single out the two worst - _Date Movie_ and _[The Covenant](http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/covenant/) _ ("Daft but nonetheless enjoyable supernatural thriller, featuring some hilariously bad dialogue, impressive special effects and some genuinely creepy scenes." - one of two who gave it a positive review). 
  10. Worst week (of my life?): March 2005, _The Ring Two_ / _[Guess Who](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0372237/)_.
    1. See also: July 2005,  _The Island/Fantastic Four_.
  11. Maybe the most depressing stat: I've seen at least 18 movies twice in the theater. Among them: _Scary Movie 3_ , _Blades of Glory_ , _300_ , _Beerfest_.
  12. What is _[The Interpreter](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0373926/)_? What is _[The Sentinel](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0443632/)_? What is _[Vantage Point](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0443274/)_? What is _[16 Blocks](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0450232/)_? What is _[Poseidon](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0409182/)_? What is _[The Skeleton Key](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0397101/)_? What is _[Smokin' Aces](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0475394/)_? Why did I see all of these things?

More to come on this.

