---
layout: post
title:  "Will Anyone Watch Tonight's Oscars?"
date:   2014-03-02
categories: movies, data, movie tickets
---

Claims are often made about why television viewership of the Academy Awards
ceremony fluctuates from year to year - it's the
[host](http://www.eonline.com/news/391690/2013-oscars-ratings-seth-macfarlane-
bumps-up-numbers-from-2012-how-does-he-rank-against-previous-hosts), the
[films up for Best
Picture](http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/28/movies/awardsseason/oscars-flat-tv-
ratings-worry-hollywood.html), the [number of films up for Best
Picture](http://www.cnn.com/2009/SHOWBIZ/Movies/06/24/oscars.expansion.nominees/),
or various other reasons.  
  
I chose to focus on one part of that - the films up for Best Picture - and
analyze them based on their box office revenue prior to the ceremony each
year. I stuck to the period from 1982 to today, due to the box office numbers
being less consistent prior to that point, and to domestic box office and
viewership numbers.  
  
The first chart is just the TV viewership numbers for each year. There's the
household rating (the [Nielsen
rating](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nielsen_ratings)), the household share,
and the number of viewers. The distinction between rating and share is simple
- rating measures the percentage of total television-equipped households tuned
into a program, while share measures the percentage of TVs actually in use at
the time tuned into the program.  
  

[![](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-I9jwzX36e-4/UxNdvDKKX4I/AAAAAAAAAI8/McSTbo9OEEQ/s1600/Ratings.png)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-I9jwzX36e-4/UxNdvDKKX4I/AAAAAAAAAI8/McSTbo9OEEQ/s1600/Ratings.png)

  
There's a clear trend down - most noticeably in household share. This
indicates that while a somewhat smaller number of people are watching the
Oscars (between 35-50 million, with recent years hovering around 40), a
significantly smaller percentage of total TVs that are in use at the time are
actually watching the Oscars (from about 60% in 1983 to 36% last year).  
  
The second chart has more information - it shows the box office revenue, up
until the ceremony, for each of the films nominated for Best Picture. It is
also, importantly, adjusted for inflation. Each bar represents the
distribution of grosses - the start of the bar being the gross of the smallest
film ( _Nebraska_  this year) and the color separation (from black to yellow)
being each successive film. The red line is the average gross of all Best
Picture nominees in each year.  
  

[![](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-4MJ6JOEfByc/UxNdagybRrI/AAAAAAAAAI4/K0G5v5EETTE/s1600/BP+Gross.png)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-4MJ6JOEfByc/UxNdagybRrI/AAAAAAAAAI4/K0G5v5EETTE/s1600/BP+Gross.png)

  
Here you see some more variation - years like 1982, 1997, and 2009 stand out
considerably because of huge hits - _E.T._ , _Titanic_ , and _Avatar_
respectively. And years like 1984, 2004, and 2005 stand out in having no
obvious outliers - and a considerably low average gross.  
  
The final chart shows the year-over-year change of five numbers - rating,
share, viewers, average gross, and highest gross.  
  

[![](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-p96t-
TBgN5E/UxNda20jLuI/AAAAAAAAAIw/r__PncFPghc/s1600/YoY+Change.png)](http://3.bp.blogspot.com
/-p96t-TBgN5E/UxNda20jLuI/AAAAAAAAAIw/r__PncFPghc/s1600/YoY+Change.png)

  
One important additional statistic for this chart is the correlation between
the changes in average and highest gross, and the changes in viewership each
year. The correlation is highest (64%) between the change in average gross and
the change in viewership in millions of people. Put more simply, there is a
fairly (though not hugely) significant relationship between the year-over-year
change in average gross, and the year-over-year change in people watching.  
  
Is it predictive? That's harder to say - and maybe a topic for another time.
But you can definitely see spikes in viewership in years (like 1982, 1997, and
2009) where the average gross is significantly higher - where there are bigger
hits up for the biggest award. But to get back to the question of whether
anyone will watch tonight's Oscars - according to these numbers, fewer people
will, given that, on average, the films have grossed less. But the average
gross is only one number - maybe Ellen will matter more than anything else.  
  
( _Note:_ I am focusing on the numbers that I can gather. Changes in the type
of viewership - online, On-Demand, etc. - are harder to account for. Which is
not to say they aren't meaningful - they are, in all likelihood, very
meaningful and becoming moreso - but I can only analyze the consistent
datasets that I can access.)  
  

