Given a suggestion from a commenter at [The Film
Experience](http://thefilmexperience.net/blog/2014/2/17/when-all-acting-
nominees-come-from-best-pictures.html) (the same one who helped to correct a
previous post), I took a look at how often any acting categories were fully
represented by non-Best Picture nominees at the Oscars. Unsurprisingly, it's
rare.  
  
Yet that wasn't the most interesting point. It turns out that it's far more
likely, historically, that Best Actress nominees do not show up in Best
Picture nominees, than any other acting category.  
  
  

[![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-PizSfiGZ4aE/UwQbEOdkexI/AAAAAAAAAFw/Hag6VW6Z-
Oo/s1600/Distribution+of+Overlap.png)](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-PizSfiGZ4aE/UwQbEOdkexI/AAAAAAAAAFw
/Hag6VW6Z-Oo/s1600/Distribution+of+Overlap.png)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
The chart above, put very simply - each color is an acting category, the
x-axis is the number of nominations for that category overlapping with Best
Picture, and the y-axis is the percentage of years in which that number of
overlapping nominations occurred. So, most often for Best Actors, 3 nominees
have appeared in Best Picture nominees, while 1 is most often the case for
Best Actress nominees.  
  
Two brief conclusions. One, it's relatively rare for no nominees, within a
single category, to come from Best Picture nominees (~3.5% of the time - just
a little more common than full overlap within a category). Two, Best Actress
nominees are far more likely to have come from films not nominated for Best
Picture.  
  
  

[![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-5L4EWNC3YJw/UwQbEIKeiiI/AAAAAAAAAF0/M1wmM6mdSeI/s1600/Average.png)](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-5L4EWNC3YJw/UwQbEIKeiiI/AAAAAAAAAF0/M1wmM6mdSeI/s1600/Average.png)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
This one's simple - just the average of the above. But it demonstrates the
disparity more starkly - on average, 2.7 Best Actor nominees appear in Best
Picture nominees, while 1.8 Best Actress nominees do the same. Best Supporting
Actor and Actress fall right in the middle - though the gender disparity
exists, it is less extreme. The data is clear - Best Actress nominees are
found in Best Picture nominees much less often.  
  
One could speculate as to why, but the most likely (though unsupported by any
data I have) reason would be that Best Picture nominees are far less likely to
feature prominent, fully-characterized roles for women. Much more often,
historically, Best Actress nominees have come from "smaller" films - films
like _The Impossible_ , _Albert Nobbs_ , _Rabbit Hole_ , _Julie and Julia_ ,
or _Rachel Getting Married,  _just to pick an example for each of the five
previous years. Keep in mind that I'm doing just that - picking notable,
recent examples - which does not in any way prove an overall trend (though as
the data shows in aggregate, there does exist a consistent trend, with lots of
examples). Or, the equally troubling answer - films featuring prominent,
strongly-performed female roles are under recognized when it comes to
nominating Best Pictures. Neither has good implications for women in film.  
  
Now to the real point of the article - instances during which an entire acting
category came from non-Best Picture nominees. Here's a breakdown of each time
it's happened (apologies for the size of the picture):  
  
  

![](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-XXcUlHTUrNQ/UwQnQt5-slI/AAAAAAAAAGE/SxDM4PjCLGQ/s1600/Screen+shot+2014-02-18+at+10.38.16+PM.png)

  
  
  
  
  
  
Again, not a hugely common occurrence - it hasn't happened in any category
since 2006. But clearly, it almost exclusively happens for Best Actress
nominees.  
  
  
Source: [The Academy Awards Database](http://www.oscars.org/research-
preservation/resources-databases/)  
  

